Blog: HTTP Node Authentication (#1819)
FlowFuse/website: src/blog/2024/03/http-authentication-node-red-with-flowfuse.md

---

> title: HTTP Node Authentication in Node-RED with FlowFuse

Reviewer: @knolleary There were some issues with some HTTP endpoints not using the Node-RED authentication, but starting their own server IIRC (Dashboard 2.0, right?) Has that been fully resolved for the whole plugin ecosystem? Or is our authentication still dependant on what nodes / packages are installed?

Reviewer: HTTP authentication and authorization this article cover, can we update the title to something more generic?

What about `Securing HTTP traffic for Node-RED with FlowFuse`?

Author: ```suggestion
title: Securing HTTP Traffic for Node-RED with FlowFuse
```

subtitle: Choosing the right form of authentication for your Node-RED integration is important.
description: In this blog we will discuss the various forms of authentication for integrating web applications with Node-RED.
date: 2024-03-25
authors: ["grey-dziuba"]
image: 
tags:
    - posts
    - flowfuse
    - http in
    - http node
    - api
---

> In today’s interconnected world, web development often involves interacting with APIs through a variety of authentication methods for secure data exchange. As a citizen developer using Node-RED and FlowFuse, it's essential to understand these authentication types and how they can be utilized in your projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Citizen development empowers employees to create digital solutions. However, it requires guardrails to ensure data security, operational stability, and compliance. These guardrails are what FlowFuse provides to the Node-RED community to level up their deployments. FlowFuse offers many different security measures for authentication and authorization, which all apply to different scenarios. 

In this post we’ll take a look at most of them, specifically for HTTP traffic. We’ll discuss the trade-offs for auditabliltiy, convenience to use as either machine or human, among other factors.
```

<!--more-->

> ## Basic Authentication: A Simple Approach

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## HTTP Basic Authentication: A Simple Approach
```

> Basic Authentication is widely supported and straightforward to implement. It requires users to provide a username and password before accessing the Node-RED instance. In FlowFuse, developers can create application-specific usernames and passwords for Basic Authentication, making it suitable for internal applications or environments with tight control over access. Remember that the security of this method relies on secure connections like HTTPS to prevent credential interception.

Reviewer: Another downside might need more explicit mentioning. It's shared, and rotating therefore is harder to update other resources (machines etc) and people to understand it's rotated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Citizen development empowers employees to create digital solutions. However, it requires guardrails to ensure data security, operational stability, and compliance. These guardrails are what FlowFuse provides to the Node-RED community to level up their deployments. FlowFuse offers many different security measures for authentication and authorization, which all apply to different scenarios. 

In this post we’ll take a look at most of them, specifically for HTTP traffic. We’ll discuss the trade-offs for auditabliltiy, convenience to use as either machine or human, among other factors.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTTP Basic Authentication is widely supported and straightforward to implement. It requires users to provide a username and password before accessing the Node-RED instance. In FlowFuse, developers can create application-specific usernames and passwords for Basic Authentication, making it suitable for internal applications or environments with tight control over access. Remember that the security of this method relies on secure connections like HTTPS to prevent credential interception.HTTP Basic Authentication is widely supported and straightforward to implement, making it a popular choice for securing APIs. It requires users to provide a username and password before accessing the Node-RED instance. While this method is easy to use, it's important to note that the username and password are shared and transmitted in plain text, making it vulnerable to interception.

Therefore, it's crucial to use secure connections like HTTPS to protect the credentials. Additionally, as the token is shared, it becomes challenging to determine which user or service accessed the Node-RED instance after the authentication request has been made.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Personal access tokens: Knowing who accessed the Node-RED

Personal access tokens (PATs) are an essential component of FlowFuse, allowing users to securely access their accounts without sharing their passwords. These tokens are generated by the user and can be used to authenticate to the SaaS product's API or other services. PATs provide a more secure alternative to traditional username/password authentication, as they can be revoked or regenerated at any time, limiting the potential impact of a compromised token.

```

## FlowFuse Authentication: Seamless Integration

> FlowFuse Authentication is similar to Basic Authentication, with one distinct difference. It allows users to authenticate using the same credentials as their FlowFuse platform login. This approach is excellent for when a citizen developer wants to create an application backend that will only be used by FlowFuse-authenticated team members, outside of that it functions the same as the Basic Authentication method.  This prevents the need to share passwords between team members because they will use their own authentication to interact with the application.

Reviewer: It's not similar, very different. HTTP Basic Auth is very easy to use for APIs as you can write `https://username:password@your-instance.flowfuse.cloud` and it works. For automated access, not person bound, this method is hard to use and you need PATs. (You've not mentioned Personal access tokens, can you add that?)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FlowFuse authentication offers a seamless and secure way for users to access dashboards and other resources that are typically accessed through a browser. It leverages single sign-on (SSO) and SAML 2.0, reducing the management burden for organizations. 

For users this is convenient as they can access multiple applications and resources using a single set of credentials, eliminating the need to remember and manage multiple passwords.

For organizations, SSO enhances security by centralizing authentication and authorization, reducing the risk of unauthorized access. By leveraging SSO and SAML 2.0, FlowFuse takes care of user management, freeing up customers from the administrative burden of managing user accounts and passwords. FlowFuse authentication adheres to industry-standard security protocols, ensuring compliance with regulatory requirements.

This method of authentication is however impractical for API access by other services, to programmatically transfer data between them.

```

## Bearer Authentication: A Token-Based Approach

> Bearer Authentication offers a more secure and flexible alternative to traditional username/password authentication. Users will generate the token through the FlowFuse platform with each instance generating it's own token. These tokens can be designed to have limited lifespans, reducing the risk if compromised.   In the case the token then becomes compromised only the instance in which the token is generated can become subject to malicious behaviors.  In the case that this does occur, simple deleting the token will elevate any unwanted access.

Reviewer: Use case is automated access, not as a person.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bearer Authentication offers a more secure and flexible alternative to traditional username/password authentication. Users will generate the token through the FlowFuse platform with each instance generating its own token. These tokens can be designed to have limited lifespans, reducing the risk if compromised. In the case the token then becomes compromised only the instance in which the token is generated can become subject to malicious behaviors. In the case that this does occur, simply deleting the token will elevate any unwanted access.

Compared to FlowFuse Authentication, this method is very well suited for API access and programmatic access to FlowFuse.
```

---
title: Securing HTTP Traffic for Node-RED with FlowFuse
subtitle: Choosing the right form of authentication for your Node-RED integration is important.
description: In this blog we will discuss the various forms of authentication for integrating web applications with Node-RED.

> date: 2024-03-25

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-03-26
```

authors: ["grey-dziuba"]
image: 
tags:
    - posts
    - flowfuse
    - http in
    - http node
    - api
---

> Citizen development empowers employees to create digital solutions. However, it requires guardrails to ensure data security, operational stability, and compliance. These guardrails are what FlowFuse provides to the Node-RED community to level up their deployments. FlowFuse offers many different security measures for authentication and authorization, which all apply to different scenarios. 

Reviewer: My understanding of English is that it would be guard rails, versus guardrails. I'm not sure, but letting you make a decision. Just flagging

In this post we’ll take a look at most of them, specifically for HTTP traffic. We’ll discuss the trade-offs for auditabliltiy, convenience to use as either machine or human, among other factors.

<!--more-->

## HTTP Basic Authentication: A Simple Approach

> HTTP Basic Authentication is widely supported and straightforward to implement, making it a popular choice for securing APIs. It requires users to provide a username and password before accessing the Node-RED instance. While this method is easy to use, it's important to note that the username and password are shared and transmitted in plain text, making it vulnerable to interception.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTTP Basic Authentication is widely supported and straightforward to implement, making it a popular choice for securing APIs. It requires users to provide a username and password before accessing the Node-RED instance. While this method is easy to use, it's important to note that the username and password are shared and transmitted in plain text, making it vulnerable to interception if the connection doesn't leverage 
SSL/TLS. FlowFuse by default ensures SSL/TLS is deployed.
```

---
title: Securing HTTP Traffic for Node-RED with FlowFuse
subtitle: Choosing the right form of authentication for your Node-RED integration is important.
description: In this blog we will discuss the various forms of authentication for integrating web applications with Node-RED.
date: 2024-03-25
authors: ["grey-dziuba"]
image: 
tags:
    - posts
    - flowfuse
    - http in
    - http node
    - api
---

Citizen development empowers employees to create digital solutions. However, it requires guardrails to ensure data security, operational stability, and compliance. These guardrails are what FlowFuse provides to the Node-RED community to level up their deployments. FlowFuse offers many different security measures for authentication and authorization, which all apply to different scenarios. 

In this post we’ll take a look at most of them, specifically for HTTP traffic. We’ll discuss the trade-offs for auditabliltiy, convenience to use as either machine or human, among other factors.

<!--more-->

## HTTP Basic Authentication: A Simple Approach

> HTTP Basic Authentication is widely supported and straightforward to implement, making it a popular choice for securing APIs. It requires users to provide a username and password before accessing the Node-RED instance. While this method is easy to use, it's important to note that the username and password are shared and transmitted in plain text, making it vulnerable to interception if the connection doesn't leverage 
> SSL/TLS. FlowFuse by default ensures SSL/TLS is deployed.

Author: ```suggestion
HTTP Basic Authentication is widely supported and straightforward to implement, making it a popular choice for securing APIs. It requires users to provide a username and password before accessing the Node-RED instance. While this method is easy to use, it's important to note that the username and password are shared and transmitted in plain text, making it vulnerable to interception if the connection doesn't leverage SSL/TLS. FlowFuse by default ensures SSL/TLS is deployed.
```
